of Mike Coker, C-O-K-E-R, the current planning
director for the city of Dallas. And I'd like to
start out, Mike, with asking you a bit about your
background and how you came to be in the position
you now enjoy.
spent four years in the Army in the late 60s and
early 70s. And upon getting out of the military,
moved to Colorado, where I got my undergraduate
degree in law enforcement administration and my
master's degree in public administration. I
spent about eight years in law enforcement in
Colorado. In 1979, I got my first non-police
administrative job as an assistant director of
planning in the city of Lakewood, Colorado.
Essentially, my function was over code
enforcement and building inspection and plan
review. It included zoning, interpretation and
enforcement as well as all of the environmental
ordinances of the city and plan review and
building inspection enforcement. I did that for
about a year and a half and moved to the city of
Lubbock, Texas where I spent three years as the
building official but also Assistant Director of
the Planning Department there, and Jim Bergman,
who you may know, who has very, very well brought up
the planning in West Texas. After three years
there, the city of Dallas contacted me, and they
were having some difficulty with the building
inspection division. At that time, it was a
section of planning. Building inspection was a
large division of the planning department. And
you had mentioned Jack Shute. And Jack was the one
who got the building inspection division as part
of the planning department. But he came to the city
of Dallas. because of some internal
reorganization back during the Shoup era and just
post-Shoup. and Cree Wilson era. They decided
that they wanted the building inspection
function, even though it still is responsible for
zoning enforcement, to be placed under the public
works department because of the
interrelationship and the construction related
activities, not the zoning part. That was
ancillary, so they took it over there. I came to
work for the city of Dallas then in January of 84.
and worked in public works for about a year and a
half, at which time the city manager here asked me
to come to the planning department over the
development services side as an assistant
director. Development services here has three
major functions, zoning, applications for
changes, subdivision application, zoning board
of adjustment, three major activities, as well as
the responsibility for all of the city's base maps
in both subdivisions and zoning. And they had some
mechanical problems and some timing problems
that they needed help with. So I came down and I did
that for about a year. And then I got a promotion to
director of budget and research last year. And I
did that through the last tenuous budget cycle.
And on October 1st, I was promoted then to Director
of Planning and Development for the City of
Dallas, primarily because I understand the
relationships that exist within this corporate
structure of the city of Dallas, and I have a large
number of contacts in the public environment that
extend beyond our corporate boundaries, that
physical city hall environment, and rather than
going outside of the city to look for a director,
they felt like I had the background and the ability
to help implement some management and some
council policies that the city has been actively
pursuing for a number of years.
among those policies and processes that the city
has been dealing with for the last number of years
are the planning policies implementation
program which was adopted by the city council in
1984 the implementation of then two new programs
that derived from the planning policies and one of
those is the growth policy plan if you will with me
read comprehensive plan growth policy plan
comprehensive plan well it's not as broad brushed
as a comprehensive plan in the technical sense
it's going to be as close as the city of Dallas ever
has been to a comprehensive plan assuming that the
council adopts my assumption is that they will
because they said that they wanted at this time the
second part of that was to develop a a new, less
cumulative set of zoning districts in order for
the public to know what was allowed within very
limited framework on parcels of land in the city of
Dallas. I understand that it's quite a departure
from the old ordinance. Absolutely. It's
completely different and it's broader in that we
have a lot of new districts that we didn't have
before, but each of the districts is much more
narrowly defined than before, and the cumulative
zoning districts And once you got to an HC
district, you could have everything that
preceded it. But under this current program, if
you have something that is
Let's see, regional retail, which might be the
equivalent of the old shopping center or
something. I mean, you know what you can have
there, and it's not everything that preceded it.
There are finite limits to what you've got. But
that's just an adjunct to what we're talking
about. Those two things... are policies and
ordinances that the City Council needs to adopt.
As a result of that, we've come into an area that's
known as transition, the transition policy that
helps us get from the existing zoning ordinance,
which has been on the map for 27 years, and the new
ordinance, which will take effect ostensibly on
July 19, 1989. And the transition is how we get from
here, where we are today, to there in an orderly
fashion. That could be quite awkward. It's going
to be a very
unique test of our ability to communicate with the
public. Do you think that there will be many suits
involved? I don't know. I think a lot of it depends
upon how well we do communicate with our
constituency. If you look at it in a broader
perspective, most of the residential,
especially single-family, duplex,
multi-family, they are direct transition. They
go from what they are today to what they will be next
time, and all we're doing is adding an A behind the
designation. I mean, they're exactly the same. So
that takes about 85% of the city, so that leaves
15%. That 15% is comprised of about 30,000
property owners, and that's all the
non-residential property in the city. But that
30,000 properties, there's probably 18,000
owners. Of the 18,000 owners, my suspicion is that
both of those are not going to have too much to say
about it because if they've got construction out
there, then it becomes conforming by and large
unless it's in a box of shoes or something. which
we've got it down to maybe 5,000 people who may not
be happy with what we're proposing. We'll work
with those people on an individual basis to try and
help them along, giving them a menu of things to
choose from in some cases and recommending other
things. So you'll get down to there's a certain
percentage that we're probably going to have to
spend a lot of time with, and they may be the ones
that sue us. How long has the ordinance been in
preparation? Well, if you go back, if you use the
planning policies as phase one, we worked for
about three years on the preparation of the
planning policies, but really got into it in the
post-shoot era. Have any neighborhood groups or
special interest groups been participating in
the reformulation of the organization? Oh,
absolutely. Absolutely. The program has been
broad-based throughout the city of Dallas. 254
organized neighborhood groups that we interact
with on a regular basis, and each of those have
strong vocal memberships. The key player,
however, for the residential side has been the
Dallas Homeowners League, and they're an
umbrella organization that take in 171 of the 254
neighborhood organizations we have a couple of
other significant property homeowner property
associations that are umbrella in nature and
citizens for for planning, and there's two or
three other acronyms that I can't remember. But
they all had an active role in this process. And the
process has been going on, frankly, since 1984
when we adopted the planning policies. OK. How do
you manage this? How is it structured in terms of
achieving good relationship between the
planning agency staff and the neighboring groups
or the special interest groups?
A couple of years ago, Dennis Wilson, who was the
director of the planning department for three
years, just preceding me,
was authorized to increase his staff by three
members. One of the members is Ray Stanton, who
used to be an assistant director of the planning
department over the comprehensive planning
division. But he is now an assistant director over
the planning policies implementation team. So
the planning policies implementation team,
which has this, it's actually four people now, who
are the focus of our interactive approach, along
with support from each of the other divisions. I
mean, he can take resources that he needs on a
temporary basis to support him, like graphics
support, comprehensive planning support,
special studies. These people all have other
full-time jobs as well as being support to this
planning policies implementation team. But the
strategy was to have this planning policies
implementation team be the locus of our
interactive effort with the community. I'm not
trying to say that it was interacting with DHL or
interacting with NAIOP, the National
Association of Industrial and Office Parks. They
were very strong players, but they played with
this policy group, planning policies group. And
that's been a very difficult marriage over the
last two or three years. And we've gotten down,
since August, we've developed a transition
policy since August. And members from this
diverse group of citizens sat on this committee,
which was chaired by one of our city council
members, and they hammered out this transition
policy, which was adopted in January with final
refinement. scheduled for June 30th. The
council? Yes. And so, I mean, it's been a
multi-phase mechanism, and it hasn't been
smooth. I mean, it's been a painful, painful
process. Jim Reed, if you haven't talked to Jim,
you probably need to talk to Jim. He's the
assistant city manager, and he has four
departments that have a lot of
development-related activities. But he said as
recently as yesterday when we were briefing the
plan commission on our Dallas area rapid transit
program and our transition program that if
anybody ever hires him again to
rezone their city, he's going to tell them no
because it's a very painful, excruciatingly
painful process that forces you as an individual
and a group to muster all of your political skills,
your negotiation skills, your ability to field a
lot of abuse, and to do it for a continued period of
time. And we had all of that here. And what we seem to
have now is pretty close to a rocky consensus. Now,
the zoning ordinance has been adopted. The city
council adopted the new zoning ordinance last
month as well. And we're refining it, but I mean,
it's the law. And anybody who comes in and applies
after Sunday for a zoning change applies for a new
zoning district and a new zoning ordinance. This
is part of the transition strategy. I see. You
mentioned something about 1989. That's the date
that it becomes effective for the entire city. So
as we go through the transition policy and the
transition program, we're going to try and get
voluntary conversion into this new zoning
ordinance. But if we haven't done that, if we've
got people who've held out, if we've got people who
have sued us, I mean, whatever reason, we haven't
gotten them to agree that this new zoning is
proper. then on that date certain, all the zoning
in the city of Dallas changes. And that's the point
in time, I think, if we're going to be sued. And I
have no reason to suspect that we will not We'll
find out. But I don't expect it, Bob, to be a
groundswell of suits. But I do expect to be suits on
it. And maybe some class action stuff. I'd be
surprised, just in general, if any city in this
position went on suit. I agree. It's almost to be
expected. But I want to ask you. It's been a
five-year process. I mean, that's the point. It's
been a five-year process. And that's what we
thought it would take once we adopted the planning
policies. Well, if you work with special interest
groups and so forth, you probably have then
fostered a great deal of understanding on the part
of a great segment of the public that can support
what has happened. Well, that's what I'm
concerned about. I mean, we've dealt directly
with a lot of people, but there are a million people
in this city. And not all the people that we've
dealt with even live in the city. I mean, there are
property owners in the city. And my biggest
concern is that we haven't done as effective a job
of communication with the public as we are going to
wish that we had done. Well, everyone can say that.
Sure. And let me tell you about our transition
program between now and June 30. Our city has eight
council districts. So the city's broken up into
eight council districts. And they're all elected
from their district? Uh-huh. Are there any
elected at large? Yes, we have three at large.
Three at large. And one of those is the mayor. So we
have 11 council members all together. We have
proposed and the council has endorsed that we have
two transition meetings in each council district
between April 15th and June 1st. So that's 16
meetings in six weeks. But we're really shooting
for four weeks because we want some time to put the
information together in a comprehensive form and
give it to the city council before they have to vote
on any changes. And they have set a date of June 30th
to endorse wholly the transition program. We've
done it in concept and never even say yea or nay on
the 30th of June. What we intend to do is we are going
to notify every property owner in the city of
Dallas of the transition meetings. And we're also
going to try and tell the property owner, if it's a
direct transition, i.e., MF1 to MF1A, what that
means to them. What's the consequence? That's
right. There's no change. There's change in the
letter. You can still do what you've been doing.
You can have the same number of units, the same
heights, that kind of stuff. And then for those
30,000... This will have to be by mail? Yeah. In
fact, we're going to vend it out. But we're going to
validate the mailing so that we can... The mailing
list and the validation process is our deal,
because it's state law so-so. But we're going to
have a vendor do it, and we figure it's going to cost
us $200,000. At least it won't take staff time
away. There might be more staff time. The city
council on Wednesday said that we can have
$350,000 to do that this year. We can't hire any
staff, but there are staff that we'll hire, but
they won't belong to us. They'll be consultant or
vendor people. They won't be regular civil
service. Which is fine with me because I don't want
to expand my staff. I'd like to expand my staff, but
not for this process because this is a temporary
thing. It's busy work. That's right. And so we're
going to bend that out. Then, remembering that the
new ordinance was adopted and effective March
1st, which is Sunday, any application for zoning,
for rezoning in the city of Dallas will be against
that standard. That's the first phase. The
transition thing, anybody that volunteers to
transition into the new zoning district, that'll
be done in a subpoenaing change. And we think that
we're probably going to handle 90% of the city that
way. Let me ask you this question. How do you feel
about zoning in general? What is the basis for your
zoning? Let me ask you that first. You need to be
clear on the question. I'm not sure I understand.
What is the value basis for your zoning ordinance?
On what foundation does your zoning rest? Health,
safety, and welfare. It's not a common basis. How
do you make, how are those determinations made?
What I'm trying to get at is... Compatibility. I
mean, we're talking about compatibility abuses.
I don't know if I'm getting where you want to go.
Well, I probably should ask a more direct
question. You don't have an adopt-accompanism
plan. No. To base it on. And under the
state-enabling legislation, they mentioned
something about this. Sure they did. How do you
feel about that? I think I need to answer your
question a couple of ways. One way is that our city
attorney, since 1965, has interpreted our zoning
map, which is comprised of 155 1-400 scale maps, as
the plan for the city of Dallas. Wrong. I'm just
telling you what our understanding is. Your
previous attorney would not have done that.
Irrespective. Irrespective. But to answer the
question about a comprehensive plan for the city
of Dallas, I think that it would have been a useful
tool for a long, long time to help us in the growth
management of our city. Not to control it, I'm not
talking about control, I'm talking about
management. And as we get closer to a growth policy
plan that encompasses the best parts of
comprehensive planning, My thought is that it
will become the tool for the next two decades
because it's a living document. If you just make a
plan that dies, then it's no good. But if you have a
plan that is a living document and it changes with
the tide of our city, because cities are not
static. Any city that is static is in serious
trouble. The values change. Exactly, exactly.
And I'm talking both political values and
cultural values are tied together. traditional
values. One of the things that's happening in
Texas, and I suspect that you're really close to
it, is that Texas is not the Texas that you knew 20
years ago. I'm married to a Texan. I have been for 20
years from Waco.
And she tells me that Texas isn't Texas anymore. I
said, what do you mean that Texas isn't Texas
anymore? Well, Texas isn't for Texans. Be
specific. Well, there's too many people from the
Northwest. There's too many people from the
Northeast. There's too many people from the
Midwest. There's too many people from Florida and
San Diego. I'm from San Diego. And I said, well,
what difference does that make? And she says,
well, they've brought all these different
cultures, these values, these perceptions, and
that's impacting, having a direct impact on
Texas. Well, I still think that Texas is Texas. I
just think Texas is getting better because when
you have the diverse opportunities that are
presented from different perspectives, you get a
better environment to live in. But let me go back
to... It's something that's enriching.
Absolutely. The melting pot... I don't want to
talk about illegal aliens or anything else
because that's somebody else's deal. But I think
that diverse cultures, diverse points of view
help a city like the city of Dallas to become...
We've talked about international. It allows us to
become more of a... competitor in the
international scheme of things and in the
national scheme of things and on top of that in the
state scheme of things. For example, I have a
friend from Stockholm who visited Dallas
specifically to see this building and the library
and a few other buildings in town as outstanding
examples of international scale architecture.
And I think that Dallas has made a conscious effort
in that direction. And we are continuing to do
that, Bob. But to talk about the comprehensive
planning perspective just a little bit longer, I
think that the time has really come for us to have a
document that we can use as the framework for the
development of our city and the redevelopment. I
mean, we've got to talk about both pieces of this
puzzle. For two decades now, if you assume that the
zoning ordinance that we've adopted that becomes
effective for the entire city in July of 1989 will
be the document subject to some changes that we're
going to use for the next 20 years, because that's
the last one lasted since 1965. That's 22 years.
then we've got to have a plan to reinforce our
zoning. And I don't think that you can have a
quality... The question isn't the tail wagging
the dog. Today is. But once we have a plan, then I
think that the dog will once again be in the
leadership position. Then the plan may have
something in it that suggests that the ordinance
would have to be modified. It will. See, one of the
things that we are doing with the zoning ordinance
that they just adopted is they also said that we
know that there's going to be refinements to this.
We know that there are going to be changes to this
document and that's what the transition program
should help us accomplish because they've given
two and a half years to the transition. I mean it
wasn't today it all changed and part this is a
conscious decision on the part of the council to
help us refine that ordinance so that when we get to
1989 we've got the document the written document,
I mean the growth policy plan, and it's supported
by the zoning ordinance. Then they play together,
and those two pieces of this puzzle together then
become, in my interpretation, the comprehensive
plan for the city of Dallas. And the tail and dog
scenario is really true. If you make the
assumption that the zoning that was placed on the
map in 1965 was all correct, which I would venture
to say was not correct, but if you made the
assumption that it was correct, then why have we
allowed so many changes in the zoning over the
course of the 22 years? And I'm not saying that
we're not going to have changes in zoning then
either, because we're rezoning 276,000 pieces of
property in the city of Dallas with this
transition process. And when the smoke clears,
there's going to be people out there that are not,
even if they agree today, that they'll accept CS
zoning instead of SC zoning. Five years hence,
they may think that that needs to be a higher
density.